---
title: Drake v1.23.0
date: 2099-12-31
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v1.22.0

* TBD

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.22.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->

* [fix feature] TBD Update ImageWriter ([#20460][_#20460])  # - New ImageWriter features - Adds forced publish event (writing images for all ports) - ImageWriter::ResetAllImageCounts resets counters - ImageWriter fixes - Python binding for ImageWriter::DecalreImageInputPort returns newly created input port.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* [feature] TBD ClarabelSolver supports SDP ([#20536][_#20536])  # Also modify ParseSemidefiniteConstraints to handle using upper or lower triangular matrix.
* [feature] TBD Implement AffineBall subclass of ConvexSet, to represent bounded ellipsoidal convex sets that may not be full-dimensional ([#20038][_#20038])
* [feature] TBD Sparse add linear constraint ([#20361][_#20361])  # Adds support for adding linear constraints and linear equality constraints using sparse matrices.
* [feature] TBD Convert between Hyperellipsoid and AffineBall ([#20040][_#20040])  # (If the underlying set is bounded and positive-dimensional.)
* [feature] TBD Add ClarabelSolver ([#20375][_#20375])  # ClarabelSolver supports quadratic/linear costs and linear/second-order/exponential-cone constraints. It doesn't support PSD cone yet, and ChooseBestSolver doesn't select ClarabelSolver yet.
* [feature] TBD Add tighten and relax PSD constraint via DD, SDD, and their duals ([#20398][_#20398])  # * fix pycode whitespace * wip * wip test * add some tests with for when the constraint isn't in the program * update documentation * address review * move tests * ssize bug * address platform
* [feature] TBD Add log(det(X)) >= lower to MathematicalProgram ([#20411][_#20411])  # MathematicalProgram.AddLogDeterminantLowerConstraint imposes log(det(X)) >= lower as convex constraints.
* [fix feature] TBD Implement AffineBall::MinimumVolumeCircumscribedEllipsoid (#20399) ([#20399][_#20399])  #  This is intended to replace Hyperellipsoid::MinimumVolumeCircumscribedEllipsoid, since that representation cannot handle lower-dimensional ellipsoidal sets. Such sets will arise if the data lie along a proper affine subspace.  This also adds a requirement to the Hyperellipsoid version that the data be full rank, since it fails when the set is lower dimensional.
* [feature] TBD Add bounding_region to IrisOptions ([#20417][_#20417])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Bug fix to actuation input ordering ([#20212][_#20212])  # Bug fix: Before this fix, it was assumed that joint actuators were added to a plant one model instance at a time. This is true when we add model using our parsers. In this case the resulting actuation input for the full model is ordered by model instance. This is no longer true if, for instance, a users adds actuators programatically in an arbitrary order. This could lead to an actuation input vector that is no longer ordered by model instance. This PR no longer assumes this order, but rather that the full actuation input is ordered by joint actuator index. Unit tests are added to verify this assumption. Co-authored-by: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [feature] TBD [geometry] Allow some sub-optimal uses for vtk volume mesh files ([#20278][_#20278])  # Accept vtk volume mesh files in some cases where only the surface mesh or its convex hull might actually be used. This is intended to ease step-wise refinement of models to optimize them for use with hydroelastic contact. Also, make some improvements to error messages in a few places.
* [fix] TBD [parsing] Support drake:joint involving links in nested models ([#20381][_#20381])
* [feature] TBD [parsing] Add support for using merge-includes with custom parsed models ([#16727][_#16727])  # SDFormat models can now merge-include URDF and MJCF models using `<include merge="true"/>`
* [fix feature] TBD Fix mujoco parser joint kinematics ([#20414][_#20414])  # Resolves #20367. Also adds support for joint defaults. Together these support new tests confirming that the acrobot and cartpole models from dm_control have the expected kinematics. The MuJoCo XML documentation specifies the position of a joint as being "specified in the frame of the parent body". But this apparently needs to be interpretted as the current body, not the parent of the current body.
* [feature] TBD [geometry,workspace,tools] Use environment maps in RenderEngineVtk ([#20385][_#20385])  # - Extend Drake's VTK build to include artifacts necessary for reading hdr images. - This also corrected a defect in a patch that was previously unused. We no longer attempt to delete image importers that don't exist. - Introduce EnvironmentMap and EquirectangularMap structs for configuring RenderEngineVtk (add bindings). - Add it to RenderEngineVtkParams - New lighting semantics - Specifying an environment map replaces the default lights in the engine. Lights can be added back in explicitly. - If a glTF is included or an environment map is included, all materials get converted to PBR. - In the future we may consider permanently making everything PBR.
* [fix] TBD Make coordinate numbering for Weld mobilizers consistent with others ([#20428][_#20428])
* [removal of deprecated] TBD Eliminate mention of flexible body support from MultibodyTree ([#20427][_#20427])
* [fix] TBD [geometry,workspace] Upgrade meshcat to latest commit ([#20442][_#20442])  # Note: This qualitatively changes the output renderings. Meshcat's rendered result has moved from linear-srgb to srgb. Things are generally less saturated now as part of three.js's move towards more realistic lighting. We've amended meshcat.html to accommodate some of the fundamental changes: - Silence a console warning. - Beef up the lighting so that it's more aesthetically pleasing.
* [fix] TBD [multibody] Fix point contact results store incorrect geometry data ([#20378][_#20378])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [multibody,planning,systems] Deprecate get mutable state functions in MultibodyPlant ([#20424][_#20424])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [multibody,examples,tutorials] Deprecate confusing floating_velocities_start() method ([#20454][_#20454])
* [fix] TBD [geometry,systems] [render] RenderEngineVtk throws on errors ([#20461][_#20461])  # Previously, it would print to stderr and then abort, which was less-than-helpful for Jupyter sessions.
* [feature] TBD Implements actuation output port for MultibodyPlant ([#20421][_#20421])  # Implements output port to report the total actuation values applied through joint actuators, including PD controllers.
* [feature] TBD [parsing] Add parsing of JointActuator PD controller gains ([#20497][_#20497])
* [fix] TBD [geometry,workspace,tools] Apply upstream VTK changes for a textured capsule ([#20492][_#20492])  # - Apply new internal_vtk patch. - Update call sites. - Update test SDF to use the texture map on the capsule. - Make render_gltf_client data assets available to model_visualizer_private. Additional fix: - VTK is inconsistent with how it defines their shapes. The "front" of a sphere faces in a different direction than a cylinder. We update the cylinder orientation so that from Drake's perspective, spheres "face" the same direction as cylinders and capsules.
* [feature] TBD [parsing] Add parsing of custom drake:mimic tag for SDFormat ([#20503][_#20503])  # Also extends the URDF parser to support <mimic> elements that specify a joint that is defined after the <joint> the tag is a member of.
* [fix] TBD Correct, test, and document FlattenModelDirectives ([#20438][_#20438])  # FlattenModelDirectives did not handle scoped names, which made it difficult to use in scenarios with multiple instances of the same model. It was also undocumented and untested. This change adds correct namespace handling; it also adds documentation and a minimal test (minimal because any naming-related errors are caught during the assembly of the MultibodyTree, and because the scoped test fixtures were designed to exercise naming). * Fixes #20425. * Removes misleading comments (including a mention of RigidBodyTree!). * Documents FlattenModelDirectives. * Documents the special-case naming semantics in add_frame directives. * FlattenModelDirectives will now notice when a namespace has been attempted to be added to a collision filter group and will fail-fast instead of ignoring it
* [fix] TBD [multibody] Make weld constraint use active status ([#20530][_#20530])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [planning,tools] [planning] Add max clique solver classes ([#20401][_#20401])  #  The patch adds an interface for solvers for max clique problems, and a concrete class to solve them via mixed integer programming.  It also introduces the new planning/graph_algorithms source code directory.
* [feature] TBD Added continuity constraints to GcsTrajectoryOptimization ([#20441][_#20441])  # This adds continuity constraints on r(t), which enables a better distribution of grid points for smoother trajectories where Toppra can enforce acceleration constraints.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Add MonomialBasis for a map from Variables to its degree ([#20523][_#20523])  # Add MonomialBasis for a map from Variables to its degree. Generate the monomial basis, such that the total degree for each Variables set is less than a specific degree. --------- Co-authored-by: Alexandre Amice <43739209+AlexandreAmice@users.noreply.github.com>
* [fix] TBD [yaml] Retain default values when parsing a variant ([#20391][_#20391])
* [fix] TBD [iiwa7] Add rotor inertias, fix rotation of inertias for link 2 and link 4 ([#20420][_#20420])
* [fix] TBD Fix divide by norm bug in RotationMatrix::NormalizeOrThrow() ([#20406][_#20406])  # Co-Authored-By: mitiguy <paul.mitiguy@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [perception] Improve PointCloud::VoxelizedDownSample speed ([#20476][_#20476])  #  The patch speeds up point cloud down-sampling, and provides a benchmark program for wall-clock speed measurements.  Per slack discussion, profiling shows the current implementation can be sped up significantly by avoiding accessor methods with has_xyz(), has_rgb(), etc.  Results of rough benchmark on a 1,000,000 point random point cloud (numbers are all seconds of wall clock time): * Current implementation: XYZ only | 1.19128 * Current implementation: XYZ, RGB, Normal, Curvature | 2.447968 * PR:  XYZ only | 0.6267832 * PR: XYZ, RGB, Normal, Curvature | 1.331862 Co-Authored-By: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [feature] TBD [visualization] Provide image-processing systems in C++ ([#20488][_#20488])  # Previously, these were a pydrake-only feature.
* [fix] TBD [manipulation,multibody] [make_arm_controller_model] Bugfix model directives offsets and gravity ([#20513][_#20513])  # - Add generalized gravity force test - Consolidate inertial term tests - Ensure control plant reflects simulation plant's gravity process_model_directives: Bugfix missing report of X_PC. Add example of Panda arm + hand and test which failed prior to this commit Co-authored-by: Calder Phillips-Grafflin <calder.phillips-grafflin@tri.global>
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [fix] TBD CompositeTrajectory binding isa PiecewiseTrajectory ([#20407][_#20407])  # CompositeTrajectory's binding should have derived from PiecewiseTrajectory, not Trajectory. Now we have access to methods like `get_number_of_segments()`.
* [fix] TBD [py tutorials] Adjust launcher to accommodate Jupyter 6 and 7 ([#20408][_#20408])
* [feature] TBD [py symbolic] SymPy conversion supports integers ([#20415][_#20415])
* [feature] TBD [py sensors] Bind all image types ([#20502][_#20502])
* [fix] TBD [py sensors] Bind ImageFileFormat and PixelScalar ([#20508][_#20508])
* [fix] TBD fixup: DrakeGym documentation had the wrong arguments for the reward callback ([#20529][_#20529])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [tools,solvers,common,systems] [lint] Identify mismatched clang-format-{on,off} comments ([#20396][_#20396])
* [feature] TBD [doc,setup,tools,workspace] Upgrade to bazel 6.4.0 ([#20410][_#20410])
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [third_party,workspace,tools,setup] [workspace] Build libjpeg_turbo_internal from source ([#20343][_#20343])  # Deprecate libjpeg from the host OS and remove it from setup prereqs. This relies on the recently-added `nasm` in install_prereqs.
* [fix] TBD [tools,doc,workspace] [pydrake] Resolve dependency cycle across root modules ([#20465][_#20465])  # The lowest-level modules in pydrake have a dependency cycle: classes (or functions) from one module refer to classes (or functions) from other modules such that there is no ordering of module loading that ensures the referenced module is loaded before the module that uses its classes (or functions). The following modules are part of the dependency cycle: - pydrake.autodiffutils - pydrake.common - pydrake.common.cpp_template - pydrake.common.deprecation - pydrake.common.eigen_geometry - pydrake.common.schema - pydrake.common.value - pydrake.math - pydrake.symbolic To date, we've worked around this cycle through various hacks (like re-defining math overloads each time more modules get loaded) but that is not a sustainable approach. Instead, we must merge all of those *logical* modules into a single *physical* module (one shared library) so the library setup code can incrementally define symbols one at a time (bouncing between modules) in an order that satisfies all requirements. This pull request enacts such a merge, but does not yet completely clean up the hacks. The goal is just to get the build system shuffle finished so we can circle back and improve the code incrementally. These separate module setup files are merged into common/module_py.cc: - autodiffutils/autodiffutils_py.cc - math/math_py.cc - symbolic/symbolic_py.cc Their respective build systems are simplified to just provide the small wrappers that pydrake.common and the install rules need. (The tests are left unchanged.) These module init files are refactored into helper functions under the umbrella of common/submodules_py.h: - common/eigen_geometry_py.cc - common/schema_py.cc - common/value_py.cc We must switch our top-level pydrake/__init__.py to first define its pure Python functions and then second load the native code, so that the functions are available for the native code to use. The following (internal use only) targets vanish, replaced by a single monolithic target //bindings/pydrake:module_py: - //bindings/pydrake/autodiffutils - //bindings/pydrake/common - //bindings/pydrake/common:*_py - //bindings/pydrake/math - //bindings/pydrake/symbolic The consolidation of native code libraries also provides a 5% reduction in compressed wheel size. These files are renamed: - pydrake/common/__init__.py - becomes pydrake/common/_common_extra.py - pydrake/common/_module_py.pyi - becomes pydrake/common/__init__.pyi - pydrake/common/_module_py.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - becomes pydrake/common/__init__.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so These files are removed (folded into a single library): - pydrake/autodiffutils/__init__.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - pydrake/common/eigen_geometry.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - pydrake/common/schema.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - pydrake/common/value.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - pydrake/math/__init__.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so - pydrake/symbolic/__init__.cpython-310-x86_64-linux-gnu.so
* [fix] TBD [third_party,workspace] [workspace] Upgrade python_rules to latest release 0.26.0 ([#20473][_#20473])  # Co-Authored-By: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [breaking change] TBD [doc] Remove macOS Monterey arm64 support ([#20511][_#20511])  # Drake v1.22.0 was the last release with macOS Monterey arm64 support.
* [fix] TBD [tools,workspace] [workspace] Upgrade ipopt_internal_fromsource to latest release releases/3.14.13 ([#20525][_#20525])
* [fix] TBD [tools,doc] Update release scripts for staging changes ([#20532][_#20532])  # Staging jobs now produce packages with version numbers rather than timestamps in the file names. Update release instructions and related scripts accordingly.
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade buildifier to latest release 6.4.0 ([#20543][_#20543])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade CRU and VGT to latest commit ([#20374][_#20374])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Bump VGT to support hidden visibility ([#20387][_#20387])
* [feature] TBD [pydrake] Add conversion to/from SymPy ([#20117][_#20117])  # This provides most of the basic conversions users might need. We invite users of Drake+SymPy to contribute further improvements.
* [fix] TBD [workspace,doc] [py tools] Vastly improve stubgen wrapper ([#20403][_#20403])  # This should help eliminate (or at least mitigate) build timeouts. Only generate typestubs for native modules. There is no benefit from redistributing the automatically generated typestubs for pure python modules -- it's the same as what mypy would calculate anyway. (When shipping stubs for pure modules, you're supposed to go in by hand and fix up the type annotations in the stub, and commit that to version control.) Don't use stubgen "package search" mode (--package), rather list all modules we want to generate typestubs for by hand (--module). It's possible that the package search was finding way too many things, slowing us down. Cross-check the hard-coded list of *.pyi output files vs reality. Centralize the list of "all modules for real no fooling" and use that for the docs build as well. Use a wrapper process to silence the console spam. Use a tempdir to prevent mypy from writing its cache dir into our runfiles. Remove some TODOs and dead code leftover from some prior __init__.py confusions.
* [fix] TBD [vtk] Dispatch vtkPNGReader errors correctly ([#20445][_#20445])
* [removal of deprecated] TBD [workspace,systems,solvers,tools,multibody,lcmtypes] Remove deprecated code 2023-11 ([#20463][_#20463])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Bump pybind11 fork to latest commit ([#20362][_#20362])  # This merges in pybind11 upstream's v2.11.1 Removes need for monostate_pybind.h Changes error types for certain tests
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade abseil_cpp_internal to latest commit ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade build_bazel_apple_support to latest release 1.11.1 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade dm_control_internal to latest release 1.0.15 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade mypy_internal to latest release v1.6.1 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade platforms to latest release 0.0.8 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade pycodestyle to latest release 2.11.1 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade suitesparse_internal to latest release v7.3.0 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade clp_internal to latest release releases/1.17.9 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade coinutils_internal to latest release releases/2.11.10 ([#20469][_#20469])
* [fix] TBD Update new_release script to handle commits with slashes ([#20469][_#20469])  # Specifically, the temporary source archive filename must be valid. For example, if the commit in repository.bzl is "releases/1.0.0", use "releases_1.0.0.tar.gz" as the temporary filename.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade rules_rust to latest release 0.30.0 ([#20471][_#20471])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade crate_universe ([#20474][_#20474])  # Upgrade crate__num-traits to 0.2.17. Upgrade crate__proc-macro2 to 1.0.69. Upgrade crate__syn to 2.0.38. Upgrade crate__thiserror to 1.0.50. Upgrade crate__thiserror-impl to 1.0.50.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade curl_internal to latest release 8.4.0 ([#20472][_#20472])  # * [workspace] Upgrade curl_internal to latest release curl-8_4_0 Co-Authored-By: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Enable SDP support in Clarabel ([#20475][_#20475])  # Replace the LP example with an SDP example. (The LP capability has already been covered by clarabel_solver_test.) Patch Clarabel.rs to opt-out of Rust's choice of blas and lapack. Add new externals to crate_universe: - crate__blas-0.22.0 - crate__blas-sys-0.7.1 - crate__lapack-0.19.0 - crate__lapack-sys-0.14.0 - crate__libc-0.2.149 - crate__num-complex-0.4.4
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade pybind11 to latest commit ([#20524][_#20524])
* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.23.0) named
``drake-VERSION-{focal|jammy|mac|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#16727]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/16727
[_#20038]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20038
[_#20040]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20040
[_#20117]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20117
[_#20212]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20212
[_#20278]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20278
[_#20343]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20343
[_#20361]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20361
[_#20362]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20362
[_#20374]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20374
[_#20375]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20375
[_#20378]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20378
[_#20381]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20381
[_#20385]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20385
[_#20387]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20387
[_#20391]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20391
[_#20396]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20396
[_#20398]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20398
[_#20399]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20399
[_#20401]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20401
[_#20403]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20403
[_#20406]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20406
[_#20407]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20407
[_#20408]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20408
[_#20410]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20410
[_#20411]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20411
[_#20414]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20414
[_#20415]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20415
[_#20417]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20417
[_#20420]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20420
[_#20421]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20421
[_#20424]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20424
[_#20427]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20427
[_#20428]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20428
[_#20438]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20438
[_#20441]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20441
[_#20442]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20442
[_#20445]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20445
[_#20454]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20454
[_#20460]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20460
[_#20461]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20461
[_#20463]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20463
[_#20465]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20465
[_#20469]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20469
[_#20471]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20471
[_#20472]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20472
[_#20473]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20473
[_#20474]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20474
[_#20475]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20475
[_#20476]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20476
[_#20488]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20488
[_#20492]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20492
[_#20497]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20497
[_#20502]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20502
[_#20503]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20503
[_#20508]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20508
[_#20511]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20511
[_#20513]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20513
[_#20523]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20523
[_#20524]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20524
[_#20525]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20525
[_#20529]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20529
[_#20530]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20530
[_#20532]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20532
[_#20536]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20536
[_#20543]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20543
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit da969f5c8f97e661c6ca9450d0cff0b52a240619 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit 083afa560b77ba819e53945a6479f6974b250550 (inclusive).
-->
