---
title: Drake v1.27.0
date: 2099-12-31
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v1.26.0

* TBD

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.26.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [primitives] Fail-fast when given a mismatched context ([#20958][_#20958])  # Call ValidateContext for various public methods of primitive systems, to avoid cryptic downstream errors caused by context-system mismatch.
* [feature] TBD Add System::IsDifferentialEquationSystem ([#20976][_#20976])
* [feature] TBD Add batch (multithreaded) evaluation of system dynamics ([#20979][_#20979])  # This enables, for instance, writing value iteration codes in python (and using pytorch).

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Add serialization for GraphOfConvexSetsOptions ([#20946][_#20946])
* [feature] TBD Add mixing_steps to IrisOptions ([#20974][_#20974])  # Resolves #20036.
* [fix] TBD Prevent segfaults in `VPolytope` by checking square matrix ([#21060][_#21060])
* [feature] TBD [solvers,planning] Make PairwiseIntersectionsContinuousJoints Non-Internal ([#21011][_#21011])  # * Move PairwiseIntersectionsContinuousJoints to geodesic_convexity, and make it not internal. * Add unit tests and some minor changes * fix docs and address davids comments * Fix bindings. * Add bindings for CalcPairwiseIntersections. --------- Co-authored-by: sadraddini <sadra@bu.edu> Co-authored-by: Sadra Sadraddini <sadra.sadraddini@dexai.com>
* [fix] TBD add finiteness check to linear constraints ([#21049][_#21049])  # add finiteness check to linear constraints
* [fix] TBD Fix a logic bug when constructing an AffineSubspace as the affine hull of a ConvexSet ([#21009][_#21009])  # The logic previously used to construct the affine hull had an error where not all the vectors of the basis will be found. Co-authored-by: amice <amice@mit.edu>
* [feature] TBD Implement a constructor for HPolyhedron that takes in a linear program, and outputs its feasible set ([#21027][_#21027])
* [feature] TBD Add support for LorentzConeConstraint and RotatedLorentzConeConstraint in GraphOfConvexSets edges and vertices ([#21001][_#21001])  # * Add support for RSOC constraints in GCS edges * Add support for LorentzConeConstrains
* [feature] TBD Add support of intersection of hyperrectangles ([#21076][_#21076])  # Additionally, add some tests checking the invariants of hyperrectangle

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [fix feature] TBD [multibody,geometry] [parsing] Add collision filter member groups ([#20925][_#20925])  # This patch allows collision filter groups to add the members of other groups by naming the group, instead of (previously) re-iterating all of the member links. Since groups naming other groups induces an arbitrary graph at resolution time, do the proper graph math for reasonably efficient resolution. Graph cycles are permitted. Implement and test parsing support in URDF, SDFormat, and Drake Model Directives. As a bonus, fix a pre-existing bug that allowed duplicate group definitions to silently replace any previous definitions.
* [feature] TBD Add rpy_floating_joint ([#20912][_#20912])  # Generalizes the notion of a floating joint now that there are two kinds.
* [feature] TBD [geometry,workspace] Introduce shadow maps in RenderEngineVtk ([#20944][_#20944])  # Meta note: this entailed efforts in three types of changes: - Designed changes to Drake - Bug fixes for VTK - Regrettable hack around VTK to accommodate for bugs that could not otherwise be resolved yet. Designed changes for Drake: - RenderEngineVtkParams has three new properties: exposure, cast_shadow, and shadow_map_size. - RenderEngineVtk - Replace the hard-coded VTK OpenGL render pipeline with a custom sequence of render passes. - Note: tests on the engine show that the hard-coded pipeline has correctly been reproduced given the default engine parameters. - The new pipeline includes shadow maps and tone mapping. - Incidentally, modernize the technique for initializing VTK's OpenGL infrastructure. - Testing has been updated to exercise the new parameters and confirm effect. - It also expanded the single-image tests to include transparent objects. - The reference images have all changed: - the rows have moved to better accommodate additional geometry - added new geometry to test of transparent objects - shadows enabled - adding the "ground" last changed label assignment VTK bug fixes The details are in the .patch files. But we correct camera copying and various details of the shadow map shader implementations. VTK hacks - There is a known bug in VTK where shadow maps on a render window that isn't square, gets incorrectly mapped to the world. The cause is still unknown. So, when enabling shadows, we render to a square window and then extract the original image dimensions.
* [feature] TBD Adds MultibodyPlant::MakeActuationMatrixPseudoinverse ([#20975][_#20975])
* [newly deprecated] TBD Support relative frames in DifferentialInverseKinematicsIntegrator ([#20973][_#20973])
* [feature] TBD Implements PackageMap::ResolveUrl() ([#21042][_#21042])  # Adds a new PackageMap sugar function that takes a string url as input and returns the resolved path. Resolves #20255.
* [feature] TBD [multibody] Add spatial inertial minimum length methods methods ([#20897][_#20897])  # This PR adds a simple inexpensive calculation that infers a  minimum physical length from a spatial inertia. Given recent misadventures with preposterously large spatial inertia, the new function herein is a step toward further sanity checking, to be integrated in later work. Co-Authored-By: mitiguy <paul.mitiguy@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD mujoco parser assigns unique names to default geometries ([#21045][_#21045])  # Previously, we failed when parsing https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco_menagerie/blob/d1e7d67/aloha/scene.xml with a message of the form "already has a geometry named geom0".
* [feature] TBD Drake-generated meshes render faceted in meshcat ([#21021][_#21021])  # When Meshcat sends a Drake-generated mesh (as indicated by a call to a SetTriangleMesh() variant), that mesh's material is configured to render the mesh faceted. The default behavior of smoothing them is unhelpful. Meshes of strongly angular objects (e.g., boxes) have their creases smoothed over. It can be difficult to fully understand the topology of the generated mesh with smoothing.
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [multibody] Make joint damping a system parameter ([#20947][_#20947])  # [multibody] Make joint damping a system parameter In `Joint` and its subclasses, we generally replace `damping()`, `damping_vector()`, etc. with `default_damping()`, `default_damping_vector()`, etc. via deprecations. The full list of deprecations is given in the main PR comment thread. Context dependent damping getters and setters are added in `Joint`, `RevoluteJoint`, `PrismaticJoint` and `ScrewJoint`.
* [fix] TBD [geometry,workspace] Upgrade meshcat to latest commit ([#21080][_#21080])  # This includes an update to meshcat_manual_test to exercise meschat's newest feature via the Drake API (and some instruction clean up).
* [feature] TBD Adds support for <include> tags in the mujoco parser ([#21087][_#21087])  # Resolves #20683.
* [feature] TBD SceneGraph makes use of the convex hull for visualization ([#21061][_#21061])  # - GeometryState computes the convex hull (and reports it). - InternalGeometry stores the convex hull. - MeshcatVisualizer uses the convex hull when appropriate. - ProximityEngine reports if it would use a convex hull. - SceneGraphInspector reports possible convex hull. - New code converts from polygonal surface mesh to triangle surface mesh. - update box.sdf to include collision geometry.
* [fix] TBD [geometry,workspace] [render_vtk] Obey extensionsUsed and extensionsRequired ([#21090][_#21090])  # When given a glTF with an unsupported extensionsRequired, throw an error. (Previously, we would print an error to stderr but bash on regardless.) When given a glTF with an unsupported extensionsUsed (not required), don't report errors about known image formats (e.g., ktx2), rather only about images we need but cannot actually load. The warning about the unsupported texture extension is sufficient on its own.
* [feature] TBD [geometry,multibody] [geometry] Allow tiny compliant primitives to vanish ([#21100][_#21100])  # Some model files intended for use with point contact are festooned with "tiny bubbles" -- zepto-volume primitives (usually spheres) that help stabilize unstable contact configurations. These geometries cause problems when attempting a naive conversion to hydroelastic contact. For any such geometries marked compliant, Drake would attempt to build a volume mesh with a pressure field. These attempts fail because the gradient computations are numerically unsound. This patch ushers in a more forgiving world, where such tiny geometries are declared to vanish, and no longer participate in contact queries. It is part of a larger campaign to enable a simpler path to getting started with hydroelastic contact simulation.
* [feature] TBD MakeConvexHull now supports glTF files ([#21131][_#21131])  # We're using VTK to parse the glTF file. For VTK's parser to work, it needs the OpenGl2 rendering artifacts initialized. This required moving VTK module initialization out of `internal_render_engine_vtk.cc` and into its own compilation unit to be shared. It exercises the API in planar_scenegraph_visualizer. While the API could probably be promoted to part of the stable API, that decision is being deferred for now. It is bound as _MakeConvexHull.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [feature] TBD enable solving a path via convex restriction ([#20895][_#20895])
* [feature] TBD Return bindings from KinematicTrajectoryOptimization Add* methods ([#21014][_#21014])  # Resolves 20894.
* [feature] TBD [planning,solvers,tools] Add new algorithm, IrisInConfigurationSpaceFromCliqueCover, for efficiently placing IRIS regions ([#20831][_#20831])  # Also adds a new subdirectory planning/iris This algorithm attempts to cover a large portion of the free configuration space in as few IRIS regions as possible. It builds a visibility graph, constructs a small clique cover of the visibility graph, and uses the resulting cliques to position and direct IRIS region growth. Note: This does not change the existing IRIS implementation.
* [feature] TBD [planning,solvers] Implement wraparound edges together with the subspace machinery ([#20886][_#20886])
* [feature] TBD enable removal of subgraphs ([#21006][_#21006])
* [] TBD Add comment that IrisInConfigurationSpaceFromCliqueCover does not obe… ([#21033][_#21033])  # Add comment that IrisInConfigurationSpaceFromCliqueCover does not obey collision checker padding
* [feature] TBD Implements MaxCliqueSolverViaGreedy a greedy heuristic for obtaining large maximal cliques ([#21097][_#21097])  # 1. Implements MaxCliqueSolverViaGreedy, a greedy heuristic for approximating solutions to the maximum clique problem. 2. Updates default MaxCliqueSolver for IrisInConfigurationSpaceFromCliqueCover to MaxCliqueSolverViaGreedy in order to remove dependency on the proprietary MIP solvers.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [tutorials,workspace] [tutorials] Hydroelastic Contact: Nonconvex Mesh ([#20774][_#20774])
* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [common,geometry,workspace] [yaml] Improve variant support for primitive types ([#20937][_#20937])
* [fix] TBD [manipulation,workspace,doc,multibody,tools] [tri_homecart] Move to drake_models package ([#21004][_#21004])  # Update drake_models to latest commit. For example, users should now load package://drake_models/tri_homecart/homecart.dmd.yaml instead of package://drake/manipulation/models/tri_homecart/homecart.dmd.yaml
* [feature] TBD Implements DerivativeTrajectory ([#21036][_#21036])  # Trajectory objects provide derivatives by implementing `DoEvalDerivative` _and_ `DoMakeDerivative`. `DoEvalDerivative` evaluates the derivative value at a point in time. `DoMakeDerivative` returns a new Trajectory object which represents the derivative. In some cases, it is easy to implement `DoEvalDerivative`, but difficult or inefficient to implement `DoMakeDerivative` natively. And it may be just as efficient to use `DoEvalDerivative` even in repeated evaluations of the derivative. The %DerivativeTrajectory class helps with this case -- given a `nominal` Trajectory, it provides a Trajectory interface that calls `nominal.EvalDerivative()` to implement `Trajectory::value()`. Resolves 20982.
* [feature] TBD Promote SimIiwaDriver to public API ([#21040][_#21040])
* [fix] TBD [common] Adjust FindResource on installed Drake to chase symlinks ([#21092][_#21092])  # In case the user had set up any symlinks to help load Drake's runtime libraries, the logic to find the neighboring `$prefix/share` would fail to find the neighbor. Here we add a second attempt to find the `share` tree after resolving all symlinks in the library path. This should only add new capability, not break anything that is already working properly.
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [py visualization] Avoid runpy warning due to import order ([#20968][_#20968])  # When downstream code invokes meldis (or similar) using runpy, they would see this warning: `RuntimeWarning: 'pydrake.visualization.meldis' found in sys.modules after import of package 'pydrake.visualization', but prior to execution of 'pydrake.visualization.meldis'; this may result in unpredictable behaviour`. We can avoid that by importing the command-line modules during all.py instead of during their parent module's import.
* [feature] TBD [mesh_to_model] Warn about implausible scale ([#20966][_#20966])  # Wavefront .obj files do not specify or store units for the vertex vectors, and different tools use different units. It is impractical and imprecise to try to infer units from comments that might be in the input file (though some software tries): https://stackoverflow.com/questions/47995531/three-js-load-proper-model-scale-size Instead, this patch checks the volume of the output against implausibly large and small volumes, and issues warnings.
* [feature] TBD Convert Drake ExpressionKind.Constant to Sympy Integer and Float ([#20996][_#20996])
* [feature] TBD [visualization] Allow adding triad to multibody Frame ([#21064][_#21064])
* [fix] TBD [py yaml] Handle UnionType hints ([#21108][_#21108])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Don't install as build step ([#20916][_#20916])  # Rip out use of ExternalProject to drive the build, as we aren't doing anything that really benefits from it. Move the install logic to install(CODE) so that it happens via 'make install' (or the equivalent), rather than as part of the build (e.g. 'make'). Similarly, move the call that announces build information to the configure stage.
* [fix] TBD [doc,tools,workspace] [doc] Drop Focal as a supported platform ([#20952][_#20952])  # This doesn't yet rip it out of the code or Jenkins, rather just the docs.
* [fix] TBD [tools,workspace] [workspace] Upgrade drake_models to latest commit ([#21039][_#21039])
* [feature] TBD [setup,doc,tools,workspace] Update MacOS Python to 3.12 ([#21013][_#21013])
* [breaking change newly deprecated] TBD [tools,workspace] [install] Deprecate drake_bazel_installed support ([#21057][_#21057])  # This doesn't work with bzlmod, and I can't figure out how to make it work. Even with repository rules, every few months it breaks and I can't invest the time anymore to keep it working. If there are Bazel users out there who want this to work and can figure out how to make it happen, we'd certainly welcome a pull request with an improved implementation. For Bazel users who only need pydrake, note that the rules_python support for pip wheel is pretty good these days; using the pydrake wheels via rules_python is a good option. During the deprecation window we will continue to install the code in case it still happens to work for you, but we are no longer testing it in our CI so it will probably bitrot at some point.
* [fix] TBD [tools,cmake] [workspace] Adjust apple_support for Bazel 7 compatibility ([#21116][_#21116])  # This re-applies f2187b3f (by reverting the 5a35be04 revert). For macOS users building from source, Bazel 7 now requires a snippet to be added directly to WORKSPACE (not our default.bzl), or to the MODULE.bazel. Downstream projects using drake_bazel_external on macOS will need to mimic this same change (or similar), per instructions at https://github.com/bazelbuild/apple_support#toolchain-setup.
* [fix] TBD [doc,setup,tools] [setup] Upgrade Bazel to latest release 7.0.2 ([#21103][_#21103])
* [fix] TBD [tools] Disable legacy_create_init by default ([#21126][_#21126])  # Update linters' BUILD rules to match. This fixes some backcompat problems with Bazel 7.1.0.
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [workspace,geometry] Fix lights expressed in camera frame for RenderEngineVtk ([#20930][_#20930])  # * Fixes VTK illumination bugs See the documentation in fix_illumination_bugs.patch for details. But this corrects: 1. Missing tests on the "positionality" of a light, 2. Computation using uninitialized memory. * Fix lights expressed in camera frame for RenderEngineVtk The old code misrepresented the device frame; it was incomplete. It flipped to left-handed when it is more accurate to rotate the around Cx 180 deg. This also changes the light direction vector semantics. The input value need not be unit length, just normalizable. RenderEngineVtk had to change what it was doing, but RenderEngineGl was already doing this. Only its test was expanded to explicitly cover normalization.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade ros_xacro,intel_realsense_ros ([#20960][_#20960])  # Upgrade ros_xacro_internal to latest commit. Upgrade intel_realsense_ros to latest commit. Un-pin both of them in new_release. (We should never have pinned them to the Focal version of ROS unconditionally. Instead of trying to fight with pin-matching across multiple OS versions, we'll just always use the latest; it will be fine.)
* [fix] TBD [workspace,examples,geometry,tools,visualization,multibody] [workspace] Remove drake_visualizer ([#20963][_#20963])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Add boost_internal ([#21037][_#21037])  # Also add com_github_nelhage_rules_boost_internal for its BUILD file. These two repositories are not enabled by default. They are only used when --WITH_USD=ON is enabled.
* [fix] TBD Fix linker options for building on arm64 ([#21047][_#21047])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade xmlrunner_py to latest release 3.2.0 ([#21071][_#21071])  # Flag it as using tags only, not GitHub release announcements.
* [removal of deprecated] TBD [workspace,multibody] Remove deprecated code 2024-03 ([#21075][_#21075])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade abseil_cpp_internal to latest commit ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade build_bazel_apple_support to latest release 1.14.0 ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade com_github_nelhage_rules_boost_internal to latest commit ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade crate_universe to latest ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade libpng_internal to latest release v1.6.43 ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,third_party] [workspace] Upgrade rules_python to latest release 0.31.0 ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade typing_extensions_internal to latest release 4.10.0 ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade vtk_internal to latest commit ([#21072][_#21072])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade openusd_internal to latest release v24.03 ([#21078][_#21078])  # Add and use a lockfile generator.
* [feature] TBD [workspace,tools,doc] [workspace] Remove determine_os logic ([#21089][_#21089])  # Centralize choice of C++20 to be project-wide, instead of OS-specific. Simplify CMakeLists to use whatever OS codename it finds for the bazel customizations, with only warnings (not errors) when none is found. Overall, these changes remove some barriers to building Drake on non-Ubuntu linuxen.
* [fix] TBD [workspace,tools] [workspace] Upgrade rust repositories to latest ([#21083][_#21083])  # - Upgrade rules_rust to latest release 0.40.0 - Upgrade rust_toolchain to latest - Upgrade crate_universe to latest - Install crate_universe license docs using their rules_license badges
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Patch rules_rust for Bazel 7 compatibility ([#21104][_#21104])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Patch gflags for Bazel 7 compatibility ([#21106][_#21106])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,tools,doc] [tools] Bump minimum supported versions ([#21107][_#21107])  # GCC >= 11 (now that Focal is gone). Clang >= 14 (now that Focal is gone). Bazel >= 6.0 (amends cdeb0c61, which broke bazel < 6). Remove some legacy cc_toolchain code for earlier bazel versions, that no longer works on Bazel >= 7 on macOS.
* [fix] TBD [tools] Fix github.bzl for extracting attachments without a prefix ([#21111][_#21111])  # Unlike most other functions in Bazel, we can't pass None to stripPrefix to select the default behavior (of no stripping). We actually need to omit the kwarg name entirely. Adjust github_release_attachments() logic to hide this irregularity, to allow for extracting attachments that don't need any prefix stripped away.
* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.27.0) named
``drake-1.27.0-{jammy|mac|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#20774]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20774
[_#20831]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20831
[_#20886]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20886
[_#20895]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20895
[_#20897]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20897
[_#20912]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20912
[_#20916]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20916
[_#20925]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20925
[_#20930]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20930
[_#20937]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20937
[_#20944]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20944
[_#20946]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20946
[_#20947]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20947
[_#20952]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20952
[_#20958]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20958
[_#20960]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20960
[_#20963]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20963
[_#20966]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20966
[_#20968]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20968
[_#20973]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20973
[_#20974]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20974
[_#20975]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20975
[_#20976]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20976
[_#20979]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20979
[_#20996]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/20996
[_#21001]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21001
[_#21004]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21004
[_#21006]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21006
[_#21009]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21009
[_#21011]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21011
[_#21013]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21013
[_#21014]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21014
[_#21021]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21021
[_#21027]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21027
[_#21033]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21033
[_#21036]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21036
[_#21037]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21037
[_#21039]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21039
[_#21040]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21040
[_#21042]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21042
[_#21045]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21045
[_#21047]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21047
[_#21049]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21049
[_#21057]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21057
[_#21060]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21060
[_#21061]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21061
[_#21064]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21064
[_#21071]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21071
[_#21072]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21072
[_#21075]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21075
[_#21076]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21076
[_#21078]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21078
[_#21080]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21080
[_#21083]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21083
[_#21087]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21087
[_#21089]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21089
[_#21090]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21090
[_#21092]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21092
[_#21097]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21097
[_#21100]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21100
[_#21103]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21103
[_#21104]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21104
[_#21106]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21106
[_#21107]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21107
[_#21108]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21108
[_#21111]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21111
[_#21116]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21116
[_#21126]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21126
[_#21131]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21131
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit ddb32f9dba9db9984b9292ad5227a8911a5950e7 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit 9a8f606ae58eb441b6445e0dfd6ab4c4da4bc0f7 (inclusive).
-->
