---
title: Drake v1.20.0
date: YYYY-MM-DD
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v1.19.0

* TBD

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.19.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [systems,planning] Add SimulatorConfig support to FiniteHorizonLQR ([#19765][_#19765])  # This enables, for instance, setting the integrator parameters used for solving the Riccati equation. Motivated by this stackoverflow post: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76463931/python-scipt-killed-by-oom-during-finitehorizonlinearquadraticregulator-is-this/76675043#76675043
* [fix] TBD [framework] Improve DiagramBuilder::Build performance ([#19746][_#19746])  # When searching the Diagram feedthrough graph, only ever ask each subsystem for its own feedthrough graph at most once.
* [fix] TBD [framework] Fix wrong SystemId on the ports of a cloned system ([#19875][_#19875])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [systems,tools,workspace] Deprecate all optitrack-related code for removal ([#19866][_#19866])  # - drake::systems::sensors::OptitrackLcmFrameSender - drake::systems::sensors::OptitrackReceiver - The @optitrack_driver external - The installed optitrack_client program Note that this does not add Bazel deprecation markers anywhere (doing so ends up being extra trouble for downstreams).
* [feature] TBD [systems] Add optional publish_offset to LcmPublisherSystem ([#19899][_#19899])
* [feature] TBD [sensors] Add capture_offset and output_delay to CameraConfig ([#19898][_#19898])
* [fix] TBD Allow GetDowncastSubsystemByName to work with non-templatized system ([#19925][_#19925])  # Diagram already supports this. This gives DiagramBuilder the analogous functionality. In contrast with Diagram, this uses the hypothesis that the extra C++ plumbing doesn't need to be documented in doxygen.
* [breaking change feature] TBD [systems,geometry] CameraConfig can use RenderEngineParams ([#19863][_#19863])  # Previously, the nature of the render engine was given by a single string: naming the render engine class to use. It makes the RenderEngine impossible to configure. This extends the `renderer_class` field to also take instances of the various RenderEngine*Params structs. Now the engines can be fully specified in yaml. This also extends the set of renderer classes to include GltfClient. Updated the documentation on CameraConfig::background to clarify its scope in the new world.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Add GraphOfConvexSets::SolveConvexRestriction() ([#19785][_#19785])
* [feature] TBD Adds MathematicalProgramResult::SetSolution() ([#19790][_#19790])  # This only supports the narrow case where the decision variable indices do not change. But it is very helpful for, e.g., writing test cases for methods that must extract context from a MathematicalProgramResult. Previously, the only alternative was to set the entire vector each time.
* [breaking change] TBD Remove CIrisSeparatingPlane ([#19756][_#19756])  # Remove CIrisSeparatingPlane, and only uses the parent CSpaceSeparatingPlane class. This is a breaking change as 1. The return type of CspaceFreePolytopeBase::separating_planes() is changed from CIrisSeparatingPlane to CSpaceSeparatingPlane. 2. We removed CIrisSeparatingPlane class.
* [fix] TBD Handle bounding box constraints in MakeSemidefiniteRelaxation ([#19795][_#19795])
* [fix] TBD Adjust test tolerance for GraphOfConvexSetsTest ([#19801][_#19801])
* [feature] TBD Add MathematicalProgramResult::get_decision_variable_index() ([#19814][_#19814])  # This enables, for instance, callers that want to add new variables to an existing MathematicalProgramResult (who can get the current index, add to it, and then set_decision_variable_index()).
* [feature] TBD [solvers,planning] Adds GraphOfConvexSets::GetSolutionPath() and supporting introspection methods ([#19792][_#19792])  # And use it in GcsTrajectoryOptimization. Also adds introspection methods that curate the incoming and outgoing edges from a vertex.
* [feature] TBD Implement MaybeGetFeasiblePoint for ConvexSet and add test cases for all derived classes ([#19804][_#19804])
* [feature] TBD Update ConvexSet logic to properly handle zero-dimensional sets, and whether or not they're empty ([#19732][_#19732])
* [feature] TBD Use GraphOfConvexSets::SolveConvexRestriction in rounding ([#19816][_#19816])  # Also fixes SolveConvexRestriction to properly rewrite the convex costs into constriants (with slack variables) to be supported by the convex solvers. Previously it could call SNOPT instead of, e.g., Mosek.
* [breaking change] TBD [solvers,planning] Removes VertexId and EdgeId overloads from GraphOfConvexSets API ([#19825][_#19825])  # BREAKING CHANGE. The class is marked experimental, so some changes are made without deprecation. - Deprecated the VertexId and EdgeId overloads. In particular, python users should get a useful message telling them to use the other overload. - AddEdge, RemoveVertex, and RemoveEdge have changed (without deprecation) from taking `const Vertex&` to `Vertex*`. The previous constness was a lie. This change will not impact python users.
* [feature] TBD Better implementations of DoMaybeGetFeasiblePoint for some subclasses of ConvexSet ([#19824][_#19824])  # fixup private doxygen
* [feature] TBD [solvers,geometry] IrisInConfigurationSpace: Reuse counter-examples from the previous iteration ([#19835][_#19835])  # This also allows us to reduce the num_collision_infeasible_samples default, as is demonstrated by the unit tests (which no longer need the large non-default options to pass). Running the Iris in Configuration Space benchmark shows: Before: ``` -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Benchmark                                          Time             CPU -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- IiwaWithShelvesAndBins/GenerateAllRegions       1081 s          1081 s ``` After: ``` -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Benchmark                                          Time             CPU -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- IiwaWithShelvesAndBins/GenerateAllRegions        547 s           547 s ```
* [fix] TBD Fix bug in DoAddPointInNonnegativeScalingConstraints for Spectrahedron ([#19838][_#19838])  # class
* [feature] TBD Creates AffineSubspace subclass of ConvexSet ([#19828][_#19828])
* [feature] TBD Implements Hyperellipsoid::MinimumVolumeCircumscribedEllipsoid ([#19857][_#19857])  # Also known as the "outer Loewner-John" ellipsoid.
* [feature] TBD Implement AffineSubspace methods to check containment and equivalence ([#19850][_#19850])
* [feature] TBD Implement change of coordinates functionality for AffineSubspace ([#19851][_#19851])
* [fix] TBD Fix ParseConstraint for cases with infs in rhs or lhs ([#19903][_#19903])  # Previously, cases like ``` b = [0.12, inf] ParseConstraint(x <= b) ``` would fail with ``` abort: Failure at solvers/create_constraint.cc:88 in ParseConstraint(): condition '!std::isnan(new_lb(i))' failed. ``` due to an `inf - inf` situation. Now we handle those cases properly.
* [feature] TBD Implement a constructor for AffineSubspace that gets the affine hull of another ConvexSet ([#19864][_#19864])
* [feature] TBD Create base-class version for IsBounded in ConvexSet, and let Intersection and Spectrahedron use it ([#19888][_#19888])
* [feature] TBD [solvers,tutorials] Implements MathematicalProgram::ToLatex() ([#19942][_#19942])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [geometry] RenderEngineGl loads .mtl files ([#19747][_#19747])
* [fix] TBD [multibody,workspace,systems,geometry] [workspace] Patch googlebenchmark to avoid shadow warnings ([#19796][_#19796])  # This allows us to remove copy-pasta in every benchmark we write.
* [feature] TBD [parsing] Parse custom ball constraint elements ([#19780][_#19780])
* [fix] TBD fix names shown off-by-one in RationalForwardKinematics var names ([#19797][_#19797])
* [fix] TBD [geometry] Demote warning message for too many materials ([#19815][_#19815])  # Log at debug level, instead of warning. This condition describes an incomplete implementation within Drake, not something the user can typically do anything about.
* [fix] TBD [geometry] Fix MeshcatVisualizer initialization of alpha slider ([#19813][_#19813])  # When the visualized geometry all has 0% alpha, we need to bump it up to 100% alpha immediately after the geometry is first added, so that the slider value special case for all-zero is in effect even before the user drags the slider at all. This should also fix the gedanken-bug where the alpha slider is <100% and scene graph serial number evolves; in that case, we need to sync again so the demotion is in effect without making the user drags the slider again.
* [feature] TBD [geometry,examples,workspace] Adds a benchmark for IrisInConfigurationSpace ([#19771][_#19771])  # This benchmark plants a flag before we start optimizing the IrisInConfigurationSpace runtimes.
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD Add SpatialInertia::SolidCylinderWithMassAboutEnd() ([#19803][_#19803])  # In support of the SpatialInertia function, the corresponding UnitInertia API has changed to support cylinders with arbitrary axis orientation. This required deprecating the old API in favor of the new. Co-Authored-By: mitiguy <paul.mitiguy@tri.global>
* [feature] TBD Add lights to RenderEngineGlParams ([#19693][_#19693])  # Adds a lights parameter to RenderEngineGlParams to enable configuration of multiple lights. - Make it all serializable. - Refactor lighting logic in ShaderProgram to facilitate. - Adds "fallback" lighting behavior; the engine's legacy lighting behavior. - Extend Rgba API to facilitate testing - facilitate modulation of a color by a scalar and another rgba and add streaming operator. Co-Authored-By: miceggar <miceggar@amazon.com> Co-Authored-By: Sean Curtis <sean.curtis@tri.global>
* [feature] TBD Construct MinimumDistanceConstraint with a CollisionChecker ([#19760][_#19760])  # We can now compute the distance through CollisionChecker, and then impose bounds on the minimum distance.
* [feature] TBD Meshcat can specify the environment map ([#19837][_#19837])  # Environment maps allow for a higher fidelity of the visualized geometry, particularly useful for objects defined with physically-based rendering (PBR) material properties. This gives the Meshcat class the ability to set and clear such an environment variable (with the attendant bindings). Furthermore, model_visualizer and meldis have been extended to take an optional environment map as a parameter (implicitly testing the bindings). The actual implementation is tested in meshcat_manual_test.cc where an environment gets loaded and then subsequently dismissed.
* [feature] TBD [multibody] Adds active/inactive parameter for SAP constraints ([#19884][_#19884])
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [geometry] Deprecate RenderEngineGl's default_label option ([#19912][_#19912])  # Unfortunately, it's not possible to mark it with DRAKE_DEPRECATED due to warnings from the implicitly-generated default constructor. Switch the default default_label to kDontCare. Drop default_label from Serialize(), which means that the params are compatible now with YAML serialization.
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [geometry] Deprecate RenderEngineGltfClient's default_label option ([#19906][_#19906])  # Unfortunately, it's not possible to mark it with DRAKE_DEPRECATED due to warnings from the implicitly-generated default constructor. Switch the default default_label to kDontCare. The only two permitted choices are kDontCare or kUnspecified; the RenderLabel docs disavow kUnspecified, and the Drake RPC already prefers kDontCare. Drop default_label from Serialize(), which means that the params are compatible now with YAML serialization.
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [geometry] Deprecate RenderEngineVtk's default_label option ([#19911][_#19911])  # Unfortunately, it's not possible to mark it with DRAKE_DEPRECATED due to warnings from the implicitly-generated default constructor. Switch the default default_label to kDontCare. Drop default_label from Serialize(), which means that the params are compatible now with YAML serialization.
* [fix] TBD Fix to merging gltf in RenderEngineGltfClient ([#19896][_#19896])  # In the previous version, we'd omitted nodes that weren't mesh nodes with the intent of excluding camera nodes. However, this also omitted all "empty" root nodes (neither mesh nor camera). However, glTF defines hierarchies of nodes and it is perfectly reasonable to have an empty node at the root of a hierarchy of meshes. By omitting empty nodes from the set of root nodes, such hierarchies weren't getting properly posed. This now considers all root nodes agnostically, regardless of type, just to be safe.
* [fix] TBD [multibody] Implements SapCouplerConstraint and incorporates it into SapDriver ([#19902][_#19902])  # Also includes a fix for an existing bug in SapDriver::AddCouplerConstraint where the velocity index of a joint was incorrectly used to index the joint's positions.
* [feature] TBD [multibody,geometry,examples] [multibody] Introduce plant.RenameModelInstance() ([#19939][_#19939])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Cleanup GcsTrajectoryOptimization Subgraph costs and constraints ([#19873][_#19873])  # - Simplifies AddPathLengthCost. - Uses the new BezierCurve method to avoid Expression parsing in AddVelocityBounds (and uses SparseMatrix). - Avoids extraneous placeholder variable manipulation. - Fixes some missing default names.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [examples] Adds option to model Strandbeest with constraints ([#19782][_#19782])
* [fix] TBD [examples,workspace,geometry] [workspace] Upgrade pycodestyle to latest release 2.11.0 ([#19933][_#19933])
* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Updated inertias for link 2 and link 4 for the iiwas that were rotated by 90 degrees ([#19830][_#19830])
* [feature] TBD Implements BezierCurve::DerivativeControlPointCoefficients() ([#19867][_#19867])  # This will enable us to write many optimizations over Bezier curves without resorting to symbolic Expression parsing.
* [fix] TBD [symbolic] Fix integer overflow in ToLatex implementation ([#19951][_#19951])  # Also some nearby cleanups: - Prefer "optional" over "bool success + output argument". - Remove unused precision; ints never have decimals anyway. - Prefer "isinf" over "== numeric_limits::infinity".
* [fix] TBD [common,systems] [yaml] Fix round-trip bugs with variant<string,...> ([#19954][_#19954])
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [pybind] Add python binding for soft min/max ([#19789][_#19789])
* [feature] TBD [bindings] Bind System.HasInputPort() and .HasOutputPort() ([#19806][_#19806])
* [fix] TBD add pybind for MinimumValueConstraint ([#19839][_#19839])
* [feature] TBD Add python binding for MinimumDistanceConstraint ([#19855][_#19855])  # Bind the overloaded constructor with minimum_distance_upper input argument.
* [newly deprecated] TBD [py manipulation] Deprecate three vestigial sub-modules ([#19869][_#19869])
* [feature] TBD Added visualization triads in meldis ([#19848][_#19848])
* [removal of deprecated] TBD Remove deprecated code 2023-08 ([#19868][_#19868])
* [feature] TBD Add python binding for MinimumDistanceConstraint with CollisionChecker ([#19921][_#19921])
* [fix] TBD [py planning] Add missing import ([#19938][_#19938])
* [fix] TBD [py visualization] Fix Meldis to recognize mesh file content changes ([#19878][_#19878])
* [feature] TBD Adds binding for MathematicalProgram::AddLinearConstraint(a,lb,ub,vars) ([#19962][_#19962])
* [feature] TBD Add binding for MultibodyPlant::GetFrameIndices() ([#19964][_#19964])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [py common] Add use_native_cpp_logging feature ([#19703][_#19703])
* [fix] TBD [doc,setup,tools,workspace] Upgrade to Bazel 6.3.1 ([#19891][_#19891])
* [feature] TBD [tools,examples] [pydrake/multibody] Add fix_inertia tool ([#19731][_#19731])
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade dm_control_internal to latest commit ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade googlebenchmark to latest release v1.8.2 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade libcmaes to latest commit ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade msgpack_internal to latest release cpp-6.1.0 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade mypy_internal to latest release v1.4.1 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade petsc to latest release v3.19.3 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade qdldl_internal to latest release v0.1.7 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade rules_python to latest release 0.24.0 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade suitesparse_internal to latest release v7.1.0 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade tinyobjloader to latest commit ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade typing_extensions_internal to latest release 4.7.0 ([#19773][_#19773])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade gz_math_internal to latest release gz-math7_7.2.0 ([#19776][_#19776])  # Co-authored-by: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade abseil_cpp_internal to latest commit ([#19778][_#19778])  # Co-authored-by: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Remove spurious lcm-gen dependency ([#19788][_#19788])  # This removes unnecessary build steps during message codegen.
* [fix] TBD [workspace,perception] [workspace] Upgrade nanoflann_internal to latest release v1.5.0 ([#19775][_#19775])  # Replace kd_tree.index with kd_tree.index_. This changed upstream in https://github.com/jlblancoc/nanoflann/commit/f69c0cbdc464f0e62bb0b48b48185c37483cef7f The nanoflann examples still access this field directly, though it seems strange that they did not document this as a breaking change in the release notes https://github.com/jlblancoc/nanoflann/releases/tag/v1.5.0 Co-authored-by: Russ Tedrake <russt@mit.edu>
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade mosek to 10.0.46 ([#19798][_#19798])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,planning,perception] Bump CRU and VGT with new DegreeOfParallelism API ([#19729][_#19729])  # * Updates CRU and VGT externals to latest, including new test in CRU. * Switch CRU and VGT tests to use test_suite rather than sh_test aliases so that environment variables are obeyed. * Updates Drake uses of CRU OpenMP macros with new forms using CRU DegreeOfParallelism.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade meshcat to latest commit ([#19817][_#19817])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Remove vestigial meshcat files from the install ([#19877][_#19877])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [workspace] Deprecate the rules_pkg external ([#19872][_#19872])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [workspace,multibody] [workspace] Deprecate the petsc external ([#19890][_#19890])  # We anticipate no longer using this soon, so it's time to start the clock for its removal.
* [newly deprecated] TBD [workspace,multibody] [workspace] Deprecate the conex external ([#19883][_#19883])  # This enables us to change to an ODR-safe namespace in a future commit.
* [newly deprecated] TBD [workspace,geometry,multibody] [workspace] Deprecate the tinyobjloader external ([#19880][_#19880])  # Use vendored tinyobjloader_internal instead (using an ODR-safe hidden namespace, instead of -fvisibility=hidden; this avoids erroneously marking C++ standard library classes with hidden visibility). Drop the double_precision patch; we can use `defines = []` now that Drake has a proper implementation_deps graph. Move patch rationale comments to where they make sense (the patch files themselves), instead of the repository file. Remove stray patch metadata.
* [fix] TBD [workspace,multibody] [workspace] Switch conex to use hidden namespace ([#19892][_#19892])
* [feature] TBD Update meshcat to latest commit ([#19837][_#19837])  # Latest commit supports setting environment maps.
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [workspace,geometry] [workspace] Deprecate the usockets and uwebsockets externals ([#19889][_#19889])  # Use hidden visibility when building usockets_internal. Add a TODO for necessary hiding in uwebsockets_internal.
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [workspace,solvers] [workspace] Deprecate the csdp external ([#19894][_#19894])  # Switch the csdp_internal C code to build using hidden visibility.
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [workspace,multibody,geometry] [workspace] Deprecate picosha2 ([#19879][_#19879])  # Use vendored picosha2_internal instead (with an ODR-safe namespace). Install the LICENSE file.
* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [workspace] Update and swap Gym dependencies ([#19909][_#19909])  # Add the gymnasium_py external. Deprecate the gym_py external. Upgrade stable_baselines3_internal to latest release 2.0.0.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Update common_robotics_utilities to latest commit ([#19893][_#19893])  # Switch to use a hidden namespace.
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade abseil_cpp_internal to latest commit ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade dm_control_internal to latest commit ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade optitrack_driver to latest commit ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade platforms to latest release 0.0.7 ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade voxelized_geometry_tools to latest commit ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD Do not upgrade petsc external ([#19929][_#19929])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade gtest to latest release v1.14.0 ([#19932][_#19932])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade curl_internal to latest release 8.2.1 ([#19934][_#19934])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,multibody,geometry,solvers,common,perception] [workspace] Remove drake_vendor prefix from our include paths ([#19936][_#19936])  # The purpose of the non-traditional include path within Drake (e.g., including <drake_vendor/tinyxml2.h> instead of just <tinyxml2.h>) was to avoid the hazard of accidentally picking up the OS copy of the header (e.g., `/usr/include/tinyxml2.h`). When all of the BUILD files are correct, there is no hazard -- Bazel will always place the Drake-internal copy earlier on include path and that will always win out over the OS copy. Instead, the hazard happens during local development, while build system maintainers are iterating adding or updating externals. This had some moderate benefit as we've been iterating to build more and more externals from source. The ongoing benefit is more limited. It also has some drawbacks. Downstream users of Drake who use our build system without modifications are fine, but more advanced users who want to substitute these dependencies with their own builds of the libraries suffer: they either need to provide their copy of the library with a weird `drake_vendor` include path, or patch Drake to switch the `#include` statements in the source code back to normal. There is an ongoing cost here for them, to keep up-to-date with regular updates and Drake churns. On balance, the path switcheroo does not seem worth it anymore. Here, we undo all of the `drake_vendor` additions to the include paths. The ODR-safe addition of `namespace drake_vendor { ... }` in our own source builds of externals remains unchanged. The users with their own builds can keep that intact or skip it, at their discretion.
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [workspace,tools,setup,solvers] [workspace] Build vendored clp_internal from source ([#19928][_#19928])  # Deprecate the clp external. Having discovered during Clp that we don't actually have <ieeefp.h> available on any of our platforms, fix that same mistake in Ipopt build rules. It's currently dead code there, but would be a time bomb on upgrades in case it ever did start to be used.
* [feature] TBD [workspace,doc] Add Drake Gym ([#19831][_#19831])  # We can now wrap Drake simulations as Gymnasium environments for learning. Co-Authored-By: Grant Gould <ggould@alum.mit.edu> Co-Authored-By: Russ Tedrake <russt@mit.edu> Co-Authored-By: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.20.0) named
``drake-YYYYMMDD-{focal|jammy|mac|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#19693]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19693
[_#19703]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19703
[_#19729]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19729
[_#19731]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19731
[_#19732]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19732
[_#19746]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19746
[_#19747]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19747
[_#19756]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19756
[_#19760]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19760
[_#19765]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19765
[_#19771]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19771
[_#19773]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19773
[_#19775]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19775
[_#19776]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19776
[_#19778]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19778
[_#19780]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19780
[_#19782]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19782
[_#19785]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19785
[_#19788]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19788
[_#19789]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19789
[_#19790]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19790
[_#19792]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19792
[_#19795]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19795
[_#19796]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19796
[_#19797]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19797
[_#19798]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19798
[_#19801]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19801
[_#19803]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19803
[_#19804]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19804
[_#19806]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19806
[_#19813]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19813
[_#19814]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19814
[_#19815]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19815
[_#19816]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19816
[_#19817]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19817
[_#19824]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19824
[_#19825]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19825
[_#19828]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19828
[_#19830]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19830
[_#19831]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19831
[_#19835]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19835
[_#19837]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19837
[_#19838]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19838
[_#19839]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19839
[_#19848]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19848
[_#19850]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19850
[_#19851]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19851
[_#19855]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19855
[_#19857]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19857
[_#19863]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19863
[_#19864]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19864
[_#19866]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19866
[_#19867]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19867
[_#19868]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19868
[_#19869]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19869
[_#19872]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19872
[_#19873]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19873
[_#19875]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19875
[_#19877]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19877
[_#19878]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19878
[_#19879]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19879
[_#19880]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19880
[_#19883]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19883
[_#19884]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19884
[_#19888]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19888
[_#19889]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19889
[_#19890]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19890
[_#19891]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19891
[_#19892]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19892
[_#19893]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19893
[_#19894]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19894
[_#19896]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19896
[_#19898]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19898
[_#19899]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19899
[_#19902]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19902
[_#19903]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19903
[_#19906]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19906
[_#19909]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19909
[_#19911]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19911
[_#19912]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19912
[_#19921]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19921
[_#19925]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19925
[_#19928]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19928
[_#19929]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19929
[_#19932]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19932
[_#19933]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19933
[_#19934]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19934
[_#19936]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19936
[_#19938]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19938
[_#19939]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19939
[_#19942]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19942
[_#19951]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19951
[_#19954]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19954
[_#19962]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19962
[_#19964]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/19964
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit b35fa8277c449aee51024adc5103c2bbaf330f08 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit 74f38050a4eb09e39595b1d8e82a0dc926e0b909 (inclusive).
-->
