---
title: Drake v1.38.0
date: 2099-12-31
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v1.37.0

* TBD

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.37.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->

* [newly deprecated feature] TBD [sensors] Add parameters to RgbdSensorAsync ([#22427][_#22427])  # This patch is roughly the parallel of recent parameterization upgrades for RgbdSensor. It adds context parameters for much of the configuration of RgbdSensorAsync, and deprecates some of the old accessor methods.
* [fix] TBD [framework] Fix diagram scalar conversion losing external constraints ([#22490][_#22490])  # When a subsystem in a diagram had an ExternalSystemConstraint attached to it, the constraint wasn't being propagated through scalar conversion. Also fix a docs typo noticed while debugging.
* [newly deprecated] TBD [analysis] Use shared_ptr for MonteCarlo simulator factory ([#22528][_#22528])  # Deprecate the previous typedef that used unique_ptr. Adjust pydrake bindings to use the shared_ptr callback, and fix wrong grouping scope for unrelated classes.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Makes GCS clonable and implements ImplicitGcsFromExplicit ([#22369][_#22369])  # Resolves #22307.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [feature] TBD [multibody,common] [multibody] Add CurvilinearJoint #22350) ([#22350][_#22350])  # Adds a Joint and corresponding Mobilizer which model a single-DoF joint along a path composed of circular arcs and line segments within a plane. Implements #22196 Co-Authored-By: amcastro-tri <alejandro.castro@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [multibody,workspace] [mujoco parser] upgrade unsupported mesh to error ([#22481][_#22481])  # Previously if a mesh was unsupported, then we only produceed a warning and ignored the associated geometry. Now it is an error. (We can use make_drake_compatible_mesh in the manipulation repo to batch convert stl to obj, etc). Also removes the "if you said stl but I can find a juxtaposed obj, I'll use it" logic. The non-uniform mesh warning was turned to an error (non-uniform meshes already threw an error, but later in the pipeline). All of the errors now reference http://drake.mit.edu/troubleshooting.html which points to make_drake_compatible_model. Resolves #20444.  Hoorah!
* [fix] TBD Improve meshcat mtl processing ([#22487][_#22487])  # Previously it failed to find map_* lines which were on the last line of the file (with no trailing newline).
* [feature] TBD Meshcat AddSlider and SetSliderValue return rounded/truncated value ([#22495][_#22495])  # They are computing this anyhow, so it is no burden to return them. And it turns out to be useful for my follow-up PR to JointSliders which has to reason explicitly about the rounding happening in the sliders.
* [fix] TBD [inverse_kinematics] Fix plant lifetime in AddMultibodyPlantConstraints ([#22502][_#22502])
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [geometry,doc,workspace,tools] [build] Dynamically load GL/GLX/EGL/OpenGL ([#22494][_#22494])  # Do not directly link to OpenGL or GLX anymore. Instead, load them on demand using GLAD. This means that our wheels no longer contain a copy of Ubuntu's OpenGL implementation.
* [fix] TBD Fix "ref" attribute handling in mujoco parser ([#22497][_#22497])  # Resolves #22462 (and the extensive discussion therein). MuJoCo's ref doesn't change the posture of the model, it says that the posture in the mjcf should be treated not as zero, but as ref.
* [fix] TBD [geometry,workspace] Correct parsing for multiple materials ([#22524][_#22524])  # If a material specifies a diffuse map (map_Kd) but doesn't specify a Kd value, it *should* default to white. However, for multiple materials in the file, the parser makes an error. It attempts to track whether the material has specified Kd. But it never resets that record. So, as soon as any material specifies Kd, all subsequent material definitions are classified as *also* having provided one -- even if they haven't. This leads to the correctly reset diffuse color of black being used with diffuse textures (producing black meshes). This simply resets the `has_kd` flag every time a new material definition starts.
* [fix] TBD [Mujoco parser] Silently ignore some attributes/elements ([#22493][_#22493])  # Now that MuJoCo has space in `parsing_doxygen.h` where we can list "silently ignored" attributes and elements, this PR goes through and silences those elements that we will never support (and reasonable users would not expected us to support). This will help cut down a bit on the substantial noise coming out of the parser. It also adds a few new warnings for new attributes and elements that have managed to spring up in the mujoco documentation.
* [fix] TBD [py multibody] Adjust element-adding API to avoid unique_ptr ([#22498][_#22498])  # This reduces our reliance RLG/pybind11 custom unique_ptr semantics. Introduce a new DoShallowClone virtual function on Joint, Frame, and ForceElement. Downstream code that has implemented its own subclass of any of those bases and bound the subclass in Python must override the new virtual function. Python code must no longer assume that the object passed AddJoint, AddFrame, or AddForceElement is what gets added to the plant. Instead, code should always capture the return value, i.e., joint = plant.AddJoint(PrismaticJoint(...)) or joint = PrismaticJoint(...) joint = plant.AddJoint(joint) are fine, but in this approach joint = PrismaticJoint(...) plant.AddJoint(joint) the original 'joint' object will NOT necessarily be part of the plant, so would probably be a mistake to be used thereafter.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [breaking change newly deprecated] TBD [planning] Deprecate MaxCliqueSolverBase::Clone ([#22425][_#22425])  # Remove MaxCliqueSolverBase::DoClone overriding in pydrake (breaking change). Also clean up a few GSG inline dtor violations.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* [fix] TBD plot_graphviz uses ipython display with svg in notebooks ([#22526][_#22526])  # Resolves #16313
* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [lcmtypes,tools] [build] Move installed lcmtypes into the main Drake library ([#22521][_#22521])  # We'll be happier without the added complexity of twisty include paths.
* [feature] TBD [common,math] Implement Bspline "linear in control points" logic ([#22535][_#22535])  # For BsplineBasis and BsplineTrajectory. Towards #22533 which is towards #22500.
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [py framework] Setting context values now clones instead of owns ([#22455][_#22455])
* [fix] TBD Fix model_visualizer --show_rgbd_sensor on Ubuntu ([#22492][_#22492])  # Opening a preview window requires opting-in to use Xorg.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [setup] Upgrade Python venv (mac) to latest ([#22503][_#22503])
* [fix] TBD [tools,workspace] [workspace] Downgrade rules_cc to 0.0.17 ([#22483][_#22483])
* [fix] TBD [doc,setup] [doc] Streamline build instructions ([#22461][_#22461])  # There is now a single install_prereqs script for all platforms, which defaults to installing only the build prereqs (not developer prereqs). (Future work will further consolidate the prereqs into simpler files.) Retool our from_source (user) and bazel (developer) pages to use the new script and generally rewrite large chunks for improved clarity.
* [breaking change] TBD [tools,workspace,setup] [wheel] Remove MUMPS, and other assorted repairs ([#22489][_#22489])  # Remove MUMPS support in wheel builds of Ipopt (breaking change). This was already deprecated, but with some time still left on the fuse. However, we were not installing MUMPS's subordinate licenses for its suite of dynamic library dependencies, and since MUMPS is deprecated anyway we might as well just remove it immediately (in wheel builds), especially since SNOPT is always available. Enumerating the half-dozen licenses needs care and feeding, and they just add bloat to our wheels with no real upside. For the remaining shared library dependencies in drake.libs, add code to install their license notices as well as a new test that will fail in case more dynamic libraries unexpectedly show up inside the wheel. As part of this, notice that our dependency build of Reference-LAPACK is dead code; we've been dynamically linking Ubuntu's default BLAS and LAPACK into the wheel since forever (MUMPS pulled them into the Dockerfile), so remove it from dependencies. Also remove a vestigial mention of (unused) Ipopt in Brewfile. Also remove some vestigial OS deps from the Ubuntu base image.
* [feature] TBD [setup,doc] Modify install_prereqs to create a venv ([#22477][_#22477])  # Modify the macOS install_prereqs script used for Drake tarball installations to create a Python virtual environment in the location where Drake has been extracted. Also use this to install Drake's Python dependencies using PDM. Update user documentation accordingly. This means we are now using the pinned versions of our dependencies and are no longer keeping a duplicate copy of this list solely for installations. This also means that we are installing a pinned numpy in the venv for installations. This was already the case for source builds, but means we now no longer have any reason to install numpy from Homebrew, so remove it from there.
* [fix] TBD [tools,doc,setup,workspace] [build] Use clang-format from bzlmod ([#22504][_#22504])  # Remove clang-format prereqs from the OS. This makes it easier to use an identical version number across all of our supported development OS's, without relying on their various package managers to remain consistent. Note that downstream projects re-using our linters via WORKSPACE will be broken, but that our linters are NOT part of our Stable API.
* [fix] TBD [build] Upgrade bazel to latest release 8.0.1 ([#22538][_#22538])  # Also switch to use the more conventional dotfile spelling, now that we exclusively use bazelisk rather than an OS-installed bazel.
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [build] Installed pybind11-config finds correct python version ([#22333][_#22333])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade drake_models to latest commit ([#22454][_#22454])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade drake_models to latest commit ([#22508][_#22508])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,tools,doc,cmake] [build] CMake installs eigen,fmt,spdlog when not user-supplied ([#22520][_#22520])  # When installing from an internally vendored eigen, fmt, or spdlog, install their headers alongside Drake's headers and omit them from INTERFACE_LINK_LIBRARIES when Drake is consumed as a CMake external project. Also remove some related cruft in drake-config.cmake when they are user-supplied -- cross-checking the version is not Drake's job, and the config hint is irrelevant since Drake doesn't install config scripts for them when user-supplied. Also fix related staleness in from_source docs.
* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.38.0) named
``drake-1.38.0-{jammy|noble|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#22333]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22333
[_#22350]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22350
[_#22369]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22369
[_#22425]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22425
[_#22427]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22427
[_#22454]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22454
[_#22455]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22455
[_#22461]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22461
[_#22477]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22477
[_#22481]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22481
[_#22483]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22483
[_#22487]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22487
[_#22489]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22489
[_#22490]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22490
[_#22492]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22492
[_#22493]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22493
[_#22494]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22494
[_#22495]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22495
[_#22497]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22497
[_#22498]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22498
[_#22502]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22502
[_#22503]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22503
[_#22504]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22504
[_#22508]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22508
[_#22520]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22520
[_#22521]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22521
[_#22524]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22524
[_#22526]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22526
[_#22528]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22528
[_#22535]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22535
[_#22538]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/22538
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit 6e2350171d34d51cb66b8d5e520252a638c2729a (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit 0eac4a39030ed4dbde14c42a4a02069e0bdfda08 (inclusive).
-->
