---
title: Drake v1.33.0
date: 2099-12-31
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

* TBD

# Breaking changes since v1.32.0

* TBD

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.32.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->


New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->

* [breaking change fix] TBD [GCS] Resolve inconsistencies in results from shortest path vs convex restriction ([#21833][_#21833])  # **This is a breaking change** (Note that GCS is still marked experimental) During the review of #21530, we realized that cost slack variables were not being written to the MathematicalProgramResult in a consistent way between SolveShortestPath and SolveConvexRestriction. This PR addresses this by: 1) The "ell" slack variables associated with the AddCost methods are not returned to the user. Users should call vertex->GetSolutionCost() or edge->GetSolutionCost() to retrieve them. SolveConvexRestriction doesn't use ell, and it's an implementation detail that shouldn't have ever been exposed to the user. 2) GetSolutionCost and GetSolution are now more robust... if the placeholder variables are not in the MathematicalProgramResult, they return the implied values. 3) SolveConvexRestriction no longer tries to write NaN values for the unused vertices on every solve. The more robust GetSolution methods make this reasonable, and now that we've been generating large graphs this has become more important. Users may need to change calls from e.g. `result->GetSolution(v->x())` to `v->GetSolution(result)`. 4) The artificial `graphviz_options.show_costs = False` that was needed in `trajectory_optimization_test.py` to cover up this issue is now safely removed. Resolves #20443.
* [feature] TBD Add CartesianProduct Getters for A and b Properties ([#21827][_#21827])
* [feature] TBD Extend IrisInConfigurationSpace to support continuous revolute and planar joints ([#21837][_#21837])
* [breaking change fix] TBD [GCS] GetSolution*() returns std::nullopt rather than nan ([#21843][_#21843])  # when a solution (for a particular vertex/edge) is not contained in the results. ** This is a breaking change. The return value for all of the GetSolution*() methods has changed types to include the std::optional. ** Also handles empty results in GetGraphvizString (which resolves #20859).

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Replace BodyIndex with LinkIndex alias ([#21811][_#21811])
* [newly deprecated fix] TBD Update working with free bodies to reflect current implementations ([#21808][_#21808])  # Much of the free body documentation still assumes that all free bodies have the world as parent. That's not generally true. In fact, we advocate simulating things like suction by putting a floating joint between end effector and manipuland and simply locking the joint when the end effector is "holding" the manipuland. The configuration of the joint is always relative to the inboard frame which, in this case, is not the world. This amends the documentation to distinguish between "free" bodies and "floating base" bodies. Furthermore, the API Mbp::SetFreeBodyPoseInWorldFrame() is a lie. For the new terminology, it doesn't actually operate on "free" bodies -- only "floating base" bodies. Its documentation has been corrected to reflect the *true* state. While the name is still misleading, it is left intact in case we can correct the implementation in the future to match the name.
* [fix] TBD [multibody,systems,geometry,common,solvers] Usages of fmt::join made compatible with fmt v11 ([#21856][_#21856])  # For v11, fmt moved the "range and iterator overloads" of fmt::join into the fmt/ranges.h header file. This mindlessly adds that header to all of the compilation units that make use of fmt::join to offer v10->v11 compatibility.
* [fix] TBD [multibody] Fix dmd default_free_body_pose vs offset frames ([#21854][_#21854])  # Previously, if the model frame being postured was a non-identity fixed offset frame and the parent frame was the world, then the old code would mistakenly posture the body frame instead of the offset frame. (This is an important change and should be highlighted more strongly than usual in the release notes.)
* [breaking change] TBD Nuke useless FrameBase class; adds frame body pose cache ([#21853][_#21853])  # Convert BodyNode functions to use the new cache. Release note: FrameBase is gone. In theory it could have appeared somewhere, but in practice Drake and Anzu never mentioned it and it had no functionality. Worth noting in the release notes as a very unlikely breaking change.
* [removal of deprecated] TBD [multibody,examples,workspace,manipulation,systems,tools] Remove deprecated code 2024-09 ([#21858][_#21858])
* [fix] TBD [multibody] Add dmd support for canonical frames for default poses ([#21765][_#21765])

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Better error message for zero-duration trajectory segments in GcsTrajectoryOptimization ([#21734][_#21734])  # Better error message for zero-duration trajectory segments in GcsTrajectoryOptimization.
* [feature] TBD PathEnergyCost for GCSTrajectoryOptimization ([#21810][_#21810])  # * Modifications to GCSTRajOpt * completed L2 squared cost * Updated Q matrix version of L2 Sauare * added documentation for all code additions * using clang format * Updated to include path energy function * Updated documentation * Fixed clang errors and removed unused variables * Revised spacing test such that OSQP can be used * Adding comment and increasing tolerance on quad test * linting * overriding function size linting in bindings * Updated energy cost to include n x n weight matrix * comment revisions * resolving merge errors * fixing small comments * removing const * removing triple slash comment

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* TBD

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [feature] TBD Static constructor for CompositeTrajectory that automatically aligns segment timings ([#21656][_#21656])
* [fix] TBD [common] Adjust non-spdlog stub to be more generous ([#21864][_#21864])  # Calls that used fmt_runtime were not being stubbed correctly.
* TBD

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Fix GCS GetGraphvizString bindings to accept default `active_path` ([#21817][_#21817])  # Resolves #21816.

New features

* TBD

Fixes

* TBD

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [tools] Upgrade bazel to latest release 7.3.1 ([#21878][_#21878])
* [fix] TBD [setup] Upgrade bazelisk to latest release 1.21.0 ([#21884][_#21884])
* TBD

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD Bump CRU and VGT 2024-08-14 ([#21812][_#21812])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,systems] [workspace] Upgrade vtk_internal to latest commit ([#21799][_#21799])  # - Remove patches that have been upstreamed to VTK. - Add more printouts when verbose mode has been enabled. - Prune out some new dependencies that cause trouble / waste. - Adjust image loading to avoid a VTK segfault. Co-authored-by: Jeremy Nimmer <jeremy.nimmer@tri.global>
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade scs_internal to latest release 3.2.7 ([#21797][_#21797])
* TBD

## Newly-deprecated APIs

* TBD

## Removal of deprecated items

* TBD

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.33.0) named
``drake-1.33.0-{jammy|noble|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#21656]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21656
[_#21734]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21734
[_#21765]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21765
[_#21797]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21797
[_#21799]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21799
[_#21808]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21808
[_#21810]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21810
[_#21811]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21811
[_#21812]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21812
[_#21817]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21817
[_#21827]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21827
[_#21833]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21833
[_#21837]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21837
[_#21843]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21843
[_#21853]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21853
[_#21854]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21854
[_#21856]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21856
[_#21858]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21858
[_#21864]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21864
[_#21878]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21878
[_#21884]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/21884
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit 75fc21fde7fad2fe2af2c7914e1a37381a39b310 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit 54537e02d8d9ce6439a3e1e209b79ab9840beac7 (inclusive).
-->
