---
title: Drake v1.48.0
date: 2099-12-31
released: YYYY-MM-DD
---

# Announcements

<!-- <relnotes for announcements go here> -->

* Fix rendering energy loss in RenderEngineVtk ([#23811][_#23811]). Change VTK
  BRDF model from a single-scatter approximation to a multi-scatter
  approximation. This will have an immediate change on rendered outputs --
  images will be brighter. Also fix a bug with a prior lighting patch.
  * Current camera configurations will need to be updated, especially with
    respect to their exposure values and lighting levels. Renderings for which
    high exposure values seemed necessary will now seem oversaturated.
    Furthermore, with more energy coming from the environment map, lights may
    need to be brighter to have a comparable effect as before.
  * The lighting configuration tutorial has been updated accordingly.
* Add a flag to opt-in to the new AutoDiff implementation ([#23870][_#23870]).
  * CMake builds have a new flag that defaults to `DRAKE_USE_EIGEN_LEGACY_AUTODIFF=ON`.
  * Bazel builds have a new flag that defaults to `--@drake//tools/flags:use_eigen_legacy_autodiff=True`.
  * When `ON` / `True`, Drake uses `<unsupported/Eigen/AutoDiff>` for its autodiff support.
  * When `OFF` / `False`, Drake uses a custom re-implementation at `drake/common/ad/...`.
  * On 2026-04-01, both defaults will flip to `OFF` / `False`.
  * On 2026-07-01, support for `ON` / `True` will be removed.
  * Users should experiment with flipping the flag to `OFF` / `False` as soon as practical, to discover any problems early and file Drake issues when relevant.

# Breaking changes since v1.47.0

<!-- <relnotes for breaking-changes go here> -->

* None

Refer to our [Drake Stability Guidelines](/stable.html) for our policy
on API changes.

# Changes since v1.47.0

## Dynamical Systems

<!-- <relnotes for systems go here> -->


New features

* None

Fixes

* None

## Mathematical Program

<!-- <relnotes for solvers go here> -->


New features

* None

Fixes

* None

## Multibody Dynamics and Geometry

<!-- <relnotes for geometry,multibody go here> -->

* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [geometry,multibody] [geometry] Add fmt formatters and deprecate operator<< ([#23800][_#23800])
* [fix announce] TBD [workspace,tutorials,geometry] Fix rendering energy loss in RenderEngineVtk ([#23811][_#23811])  # Energy loss is due to three issues. 1. Drake introduced an erroneous patch which bled energy badly. 2. Set the skybox to use gamma correction, even for hdr images. 3. Introduce a *new* patch to change the VTK brdf model from a single-scatter approximation to a multi-scatter approximation. This will have an immediate change on rendered outputs -- images will be brighter. Based on brightness changes: 1. The lighting configuration tutorial has been updated accordingly. 2. The unit tests for RenderEngineVtk have had reference values (subject to PBR) brightened accordingly. Current camera configurations will need to be updated, especially with respect to their exposure values and lighting levels. Renderings for which high exposure values seemed necessary will now seem oversaturated. Furthermore, with more energy coming from the environment map, lights may need to be brighter to have a comparable effect as before.

New features

* None

Fixes

* None

## Planning

<!-- <relnotes for planning go here> -->

* [feature] TBD IrisNp2 allows the user to set solver options for the counterexample search program ([#23735][_#23735])

New features

* None

Fixes

* None

## Tutorials and examples

<!-- <relnotes for examples,tutorials go here> -->

* None

## Miscellaneous features and fixes

<!-- <relnotes for common,math,lcm,lcmtypes,manipulation,perception,visualization go here> -->

* [feature announce] TBD [common,math,tools,doc,geometry,solvers] [build] Add a flag to opt-in to the new AutoDiff implementation ([#23870][_#23870])
* None

## pydrake bindings

<!-- <relnotes for bindings go here> -->

* [feature] TBD model_visualizer environment map gets forwarded to render engine ([#23771][_#23771])  # If --show_rgbd_sensor is set and an environment map is provided, model_visualizer now forwards that environment map to the renderer. In the spirit of better syncing what we see in meshcat with what we see in the render engine (consistent with syncing camera extrinsics) we also add the following: - Command-line parameter for simply turning all lights off (as we have no current means of synchronizing the lights between meshcat and VTK). - Set the render engine camera's field of view to match that of meshcat's. - Automatically enable tone mapping in the render engine (as meshcat likewise uses tone mapping). - Change the tone mapping algorithm that Drake's meshcat page uses from meshcat's default value to one that better matches RenderEngineVtk's algorithm. (See meshcat.html).
* [fix] TBD [pydrake] fix FindCollisionCandidates return type binding ([#23852][_#23852])  # Prior to this patch, this module was missing the necessary `type_caster` from sorted_pair_pybind.h, and the existing test only checked the trivial empty list return value.
* [fix] TBD [pydrake] Fix CalcProbabililtyDensity type annotation ([#23869][_#23869])

New features

* None

Fixes

* None

## Build system

<!-- <relnotes for cmake,doc,setup,third_party,tools go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [tools,cmake] Update dependency rules_python to v1.7.0 ([#23798][_#23798])
* [fix] TBD [doc,setup,tools] [tools] Remove Deepnote support from built packages ([#23807][_#23807])  # From now on, we'll handle Deepnote customization live in the online workspace, with "source control" via release playbook documentation. Update the deepnote release playbook to install Drake via pip instead of Docker. Deepnote's custom Dockerfile support no longer works, and anyway 'pip' is what Drake users are most familiar with. Fix some jammy docs typos.
* [fix] TBD Update dependency ruff_prebuilt to v0.14.4.2 ([#23836][_#23836])
* [fix] TBD Update dependency spdlog to v1.16.0.bcr.2 ([#23837][_#23837])
* [fix] TBD Update dependency rules_java to v9.1.0 ([#23841][_#23841])
* [fix] TBD [tools,cmake] Update dependency apple_support to v1.24.5 ([#23840][_#23840])
* [fix] TBD [tools,doc] [doc] Update macOS to CMake 4.2 and Xcode 26.1 ([#23816][_#23816])
* [feature] TBD [doc] Add support for macOS 26 Tahoe ([#23851][_#23851])
* None

## Build dependencies

<!-- <relnotes for workspace go here> -->

* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade drake_models to latest commit ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade gymnasium_py_internal to latest release v1.2.2 ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade libpng_internal to latest release v1.6.51 ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade mujoco_menagerie_internal to latest commit ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade nanoflann_internal to latest release v1.8.0 ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade suitesparse_internal to latest release v7.12.1 ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Upgrade tinygltf_internal to latest release v2.9.7 ([#23845][_#23845])
* [fix] TBD [workspace] Update dependency curl_internal to 8.17.0 ([#23883][_#23883])
* [fix] TBD [workspace,doc] [workspace] Upgrade usockets_internal and uwebsockets_internal ([#23809][_#23809])  # * Add some required HTTP headers in the `nginx.conf` for Deepnote. * Remove a patch which has been released upstream. * Remove the version pin to enable future upgrades.
* None

## Newly-deprecated APIs

<!-- <relnotes for newly-deprecated go here> -->

* [newly deprecated fix] TBD [geometry,multibody] [geometry] Add fmt formatters and deprecate operator<< ([#23800][_#23800])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [math] Deprecate unused jacobian and hessian free functions ([#23823][_#23823])
* [newly deprecated] TBD [common] Move logging::get_disk_sink to new header ([#23815][_#23815])  # Deprecate the use of its prior location and its use when spdlog is disabled.
* None

## Removal of deprecated items

<!-- <relnotes for deprecated-removed go here> -->

* [removal of deprecated] TBD [geometry] Remove deprecated code 2025-12 ([#23835][_#23835])
* None

# Notes


This release provides [pre-compiled binaries](https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/releases/tag/v1.48.0) named
``drake-1.48.0-{jammy|noble|mac-arm64}.tar.gz``. See [Stable Releases](/from_binary.html#stable-releases) for instructions on how to use them.

Drake binary releases incorporate a pre-compiled version of [SNOPT](https://ccom.ucsd.edu/~optimizers/solvers/snopt/) as part of the
[Mathematical Program toolbox](https://drake.mit.edu/doxygen_cxx/group__solvers.html). Thanks to
Philip E. Gill and Elizabeth Wong for their kind support.

<!-- <begin issue links> -->
[_#23735]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23735
[_#23771]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23771
[_#23798]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23798
[_#23800]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23800
[_#23807]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23807
[_#23809]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23809
[_#23811]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23811
[_#23815]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23815
[_#23816]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23816
[_#23823]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23823
[_#23835]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23835
[_#23836]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23836
[_#23837]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23837
[_#23840]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23840
[_#23841]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23841
[_#23845]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23845
[_#23851]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23851
[_#23852]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23852
[_#23869]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23869
[_#23870]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23870
[_#23883]: https://github.com/RobotLocomotion/drake/pull/23883
<!-- <end issue links> -->

<!--
  Current oldest_commit 1558aa8019f349a07fa283a4c4317a483bfd2266 (exclusive).
  Current newest_commit fd5b1ba4ca5fef063b4558388754b2d68b89cbd9 (inclusive).
-->
